This is the second part of a series
exploring the findings of the Australian Royal
Commission
into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse.
In part one I looked at the first of two cases
of abuse
investigated within the Jehovah’s Witness
organisation
the case of a woman codenamed BCB
who was abused by an elder
a spiritual leader in her congregation.
Chairing the Commission
was Justice Peter McClellan.
Assisting counsel for the Commission
was Angus Stewart QC.
As that case showed, various policies of the
Jehovah’s Witnesses
combine very effectively to protect child
molesters and silence their targets.
The organisation demands that there are two
or more witnesses
to the molestation or that the molester confesses
both of which are highly unlikely.
Those who are found guilty can be disfellowshipped
a form of excommunication in which individuals
are shunned by the entire organisation.
But this is also highly unlikely
because molesters are told
if they express repentance
they’ll simply be reproved:
their congregation is informed they’ve been
reprimanded
for an unspecified transgression.
What is highly likely is that abused children
receiving no justice and faced with continued
exposure to their molester
will feel driven to leave the organisation.
Unfortunately this can result in them being
shunned.
No provision’s made for individuals who
simply want
to stop being a Jehovah’s Witness
but maintain personal relationships with other
members.
They’re not given that choice.
They must remain under the organisation’s
authority
or ‘disassociate’ themselves and be completely
shunned.
Even if they decide to stay
abused individuals who develop alcohol, drug
or other related problems
can find themselves disfellowshipped for that.
The cards are stacked overwhelmingly against
abused children.
But the Commission’s second investigation
into the organisation — the case of BCG
would uncover evidence of unsuspected new
depths of corruption.
Taking the witness stand, BCG testified to
the following account.
She was born in Brisbane in 1971, the second
oldest of seven children
with an older sister and two younger sisters.
Her father joined the organisation when she
was very young
followed by her mother, and became a ministerial
servant
assisting the elders of his congregation.
He exercised dictatorial control
forbidding his family from reading non-Jehovah’s
Witness literature
or associating with non-members.
BCG was baptised at 16.
She was sure the congregation knew about her
father’s violent nature.
He frequently beat her with a leather strap
and she’d sometimes attend meetings still
bleeding.
She had blurry feelings that he’d abused
her sexually around age five
and a clear recollection of inappropriate kissing
and sexual compliments from him in her early teens.
At 17, the abuse escalated when her mother
and siblings
were away for a fortnight in Brisbane.
Left alone, she was repeatedly assaulted by
her father.
Despite her father threatening to beat her
and kick her out
if she spoke to anyone without him being present
BCG eventually approached the wife of an elder
called Kevin Bowditch
but was told he couldn’t talk to her without
her father present.
Twice, she approached another elder Dino Ali
a good friend of her father’s.
Despite her obvious distress, again she was
told her father had to be present.
Eventually BCG told the person who would become
her future husband.
He persuaded Ali to meet him and BCG.
She said Ali seemed incensed at her
and warned her she was making a very serious
allegation.
She said she knew that.
A number of meetings were arranged between
BCG, Ali, Bowditch
and another elder Ron de Rooy.
She wasn’t told about their purpose.
Again she was met with anger
and asked highly inappropriate questions like
‘Did you enjoy it?’
Because the elders were all male and also
her father’s friends
she was reluctant to give them details and
only answered direct questions.
They instructed her to tell her mother about
the abuse.
When she did, her mother revealed
that her father had abused her older sister.
BCG asked how she could’ve left her alone
with him.
Her mother said she didn’t think he’d
do it again
because he was a Jehovah’s Witness.
BCG and her mother then spoke
to the two youngest daughters around ages
five and seven.
They both reported sexual assaults by their
father.
BCG and her mother told the elders.
But Ron de Rooy told them:
‘We don’t want to talk to your sisters
because they are too young to know what they
are talking about’.
The elders said BCG had to put her allegations
to her father.
Terrified, she went ahead for the sake of
her younger sisters.
In the meeting, her father threatened to flog
her, hit her and kill her.
The elders only intervened when he got up
and moved towards her.
Eventually he was disfellowshipped.
But de Rooy told her it wasn’t for abusing her
but for some other misconduct.
When she asked why, he said they needed two
or more witnesses.
When she mentioned her sisters, he said it
had to be the same event.
Her father appealed his disfellowshipping
and BCG was called to appear before a judicial panel
of three elders from other congregations.
She had to recount her experiences all over again.
But eventually her father confessed
to ‘stepping out of line’.
His appeal was rejected. Eventually he moved
away from the area.
BCG said many congregation members accused
her of lying.
Although she was married later that year
she felt worthless and alone and attempted
suicide by overdose
an act for which she was later chastised by
de Rooy
because it was considered a serious transgression
against Jehovah.
A few years later de Rooy informed her
that her father was being reinstated
because he was ‘doing all the right things’.
When asked what these right things were
he said her father was attending meetings.
She reminded him her father was attending
meetings
when he was abusing her and her sisters.
BCG told de Rooy the congregation wasn’t safe
and she was going to take it to the police.
In response she said he quoted a bible passage
that forbids taking brothers to court.
And he warned that she could be disfellowshipped
for bringing reproach on Jehovah.
She wrote to senior officials in the organisation
but no action was taken.
Instead they sent a letter counselling her
to preserve her tears in a skin bottle.
This was a reference to Psalms 56, verse 8
which depicted the Biblical god collecting
tears in his skin bottle
and recording them in a book.
After her third son was born, she separated
from her husband
and left the organisation, disillusioned by
its hypocrisy
and doubting the claim that its senior members
were divinely appointed.
On leaving, she reported her abuse to the police.
Unlike the Jehovah’s Witness organisation
the secular courts had rules protecting her
from inappropriate questioning.
Her father was convicted and given a 3-year
sentence.
Speaking about the police and the Royal Commission
staff
she said she’d had more support, acknowledgement
and acceptance
from complete strangers than she’d ever
had from her congregation.
And she hoped the Jehovah’s Witness organisation
would be made criminally and financially accountable
for its failure to protect children.
Dino Ali, an elder for 20 years, was the first
to be questioned about the BCG case.
He was asked why he’d initially dismissed
her request to talk to him.
Ali embarked on a lengthy defence
that was conflicted to the point of incoherence.
He claimed absolutely no recollection of the
conversation;
then declared he would never have told her
to talk to her father first;
then said there wasn’t enough information
to comment on whether he would say that;
then he said he wasn’t denying what she’d said.
Finally, in the most strangulated evasion
he said:
I’m not saying that I’m denying that that’s
something
that she may have assumed that I said, or
that she said.
Instead of giving up in the face of this protracted
tap-dance
Judge McClellan continued to pursue a straight
answer.
He established that the organisation requires members
to first approach those they have a disagreement with.
He then suggested that BCG’s testimony that
Ali told her
to talk to her father first was consistent
with this teaching.
Finally, after more tap-dancing Ali admitted
the consistency.
It took a staggering eleven and a half minutes
to push through Ali’s deflections and evasions
and get that simple acknowledgement.
And that was on an incident he didn’t even recall.
Ali claimed he and the other elders all believed
BCG’s allegations
but said they couldn’t act on that belief
without corroboration from another person.
In line with the organisation’s policies
he said they needed either two witnesses to
the abuse
or a confession from the perpetrator.
But as the Commission went on to show
both these requirements were fulfilled.
Ali initially claimed not to recollect the
allegations made by BCG’s younger sisters.
But a document called ‘Notes of investigating
committee’
was later produced by Stewart.
It had been obtained from the police
who’d used it in their prosecution of BCG’s father.
It was handwritten by Ali
and dated at the time of the original meetings with BCG.
In it, Ali noted that BCG’s father had possibly abused
the two younger daughters as well as the older
daughter at age 2.
Ali further noted that BCG’s father had
admitted
that all the allegations of molestation were true.
So the elders had multiple witnesses and a
confession.
And yet they did nothing.
Judge McClellan pointed out
that Ali had previously told him he hadn’t
got a confession.
After some flustering, Ali claimed they needed
to make sure the confession was true.
It was incoherent nonsense.
Ali had previously stated that all the elders
believed BCG’s account.
But on receiving a confession that confirmed
the account they already believed
they were suddenly unwilling to accept the
confession was true?
Ali’s suggestion that confessions need to
be substantiated was shown to be false.
When BCG’s father confessed at his appeal
hearing
in front of three elders from other congregations,
it was accepted.
Ali’s requirement of further substantiation
was an unnecessary, cruel and callous imposition
on an abused individual who had jumped
through hoop after humiliating hoop
to meet all the organisation’s judicial
requirements.
Like many elders summoned to speak to the
Commission
Kevin Bowditch showed no great concern
for the consequences of failing to deal with
molesters.
When questioned about the potential danger
from a known child molester to the wider community
including children outside the organisation
he glibly responded
‘What ability have we got to protect every
child in Australia?’
When Stewart gave the obvious answer
that they could report to the child protection
authorities
Bowditch said that was done in some cases.
But Stewart put it to him that this wasn’t
a voluntary practice
it wasn’t done unless there was a legal
requirement to do so.
Bowditch confirmed that was true.
As with virtually all the elders summoned
to testify
— including Ali —
Bowditch had declined to watch BCG’s testimony
or read her statement.
Stewart asked why this was. Bowditch claimed
it was because
he preferred to be truthful and speak from
his own point of view.
When Stewart asked Bowditch why abused individuals
were required to face their abusers
Bowditch suggested it could start the healing
process.
He said it was so people like BCG could get
it out
and tell the person who’d carried out the
vile act.
But in Bowditch’s own statement, he recalled
BCG’s father
being verbally aggressive and physically threatening
towards his daughter
who appeared frightened.
There was nothing healing about this atmosphere
of intimidation.
And Bowditch conceded Stewart’s point that
it hadn’t been conducive
to arriving at the truth.
Even within Jehovah’s Witness literature
there’s an acknowledgement that, far from
healing
confrontations can cause more damage and trauma
sparking denial and more abuse.
The organisation’s literature even acknowledges
that forgiveness isn’t necessarily appropriate.
The point has to be made that an all-knowing
god would know
how damaging these confrontations can be for
abused individuals.
So who determined that these confrontations
should be judicial procedure?
Was it a callous incompetent god
or callous incompetent humans, falsely claiming
to speak for a god?
Like all his colleagues, Ron de Rooy — an
elder for 29 years
declined to view BCG’s testimony.
When asked why, he said he didn’t want to
listen to it
so he could be objective.
He said he wanted to be honest in any questions
that he was asked.
But it later emerged that he had watched
Dino Ali’s testimony
Stewart asked if he wasn’t concerned that
this would jeopardise his objectivity.
De Rooy replied he wanted to be honest.
So — he avoided BCG’s testimony because
he wanted to be honest
but watched Ali’s testimony because he wanted
to be honest.
It didn’t hang together.
It didn’t go unnoticed that all the elders
had avoided BCG’s testimony
echoing the real life shunning of ex-members
practiced by the organisation.
One individual who didn’t follow this pattern
was an ex-Jehovah’s Witness called Monty Baker
formerly an elder at the congregation to which
BCG’s father eventually moved.
Unlike de Rooy and the other elders
Baker had followed the proceedings closely,
including BCG’s testimony.
As a result, many old memories came back to him
prompting him to make several amendments to
his initial statement.
He said he was sure the significance of the occasion
would motivate everyone giving evidence to
be fully clear on every aspect.
De Rooy appeared to have virtually no recollection
of his part in the elders’ investigation
into BCG’s allegations.
He claimed he couldn’t recall a single detail
of the acts of molestation BCG reported to
him and the elders
which led to a confusing moment when, some
way into his testimony
he seemed keen to impress upon the Commission
that he was sickened by what BCG’s father
did to her.
Stewart asked what sickened him.
After some prevarication, he grinned and claimed
he couldn’t remember.
De Rooy’s testimony followed a distinct pattern.
When asked about his involvement in the BCG
investigation
he claimed no memory.
When confronted with an alleged event that
put him in an especially bad light
on top of claiming no memory
he also tried to argue that it couldn’t
have happened.
An example of this was when Stewart read from
BCG’s statement
that de Rooy had said he didn’t want to
talk to her sisters
because they were too young to know what they
are talking about.
De Rooy claimed not to recall this.
Stewart asked if he was saying it didn’t happen.
De Rooy evaded the question and instead commented
that if the elders had known her sisters were
abused too
that would’ve given them more witnesses
to follow through on.
Stewart then presented
Dino Ali’s own handwritten notes
confirming that the elders did know about
BCG’s sisters
and that her father had confessed.
De Rooy then claimed to remember very precisely
that at the first judicial meeting
the elders only had BCG’s word against her father.
But this supposed precise memory did nothing
to erase the hard evidence of Ali’s notes
which supported BCG’s testimony
that her sisters’ abuse was reported but ignored.
Throughout de Rooy’s testimony, he repeatedly
delivered flippant responses
with the same bizarre grin.
When Judge McClellan asked him if he thought
it was right that
after her father was disfellowshipped
it was BCG who was removed from the family home
while her abuser remained there
de Rooy grinned and said if he’d cared about
his daughter
he would’ve made it a lot easier for her.
To expect care from a father who’d beaten
and threatened BCG
and molested all of his daughters was maybe
the clearest mark
of de Rooy’s total rejection of personal
responsibility.
De Rooy’s responses ranged from vague to
garbled to obtuse.
At one point, Stewart put it to him that he
was speaking in riddles.
Reflecting on his conduct at the Commission
it was sobering to think this individual was
responsible
for the care of abused children.
Further damning facts about the organisation
emerged
when some Jehovah’s Witness officials were
brought in
to explain the organisation’s policies and
procedures.
Rodney Spinks — a Jehovah’s Witness for
over 40 years
was a senior member of the Service Department
in the organisation’s Branch Office
and assisted elders in implementing guidelines
for handling child abuse allegations.
Vincent Toole — baptised in 1972
had overseen operations in the Legal Department
of the Branch Office since 2010.
Terrence O’Brien — baptised in 1976
was the current coordinator
of the Jehovah’s Witness Australia Branch
Committee.
Spinks was first to give evidence
and it soon became clear that the organisation’s
documentation
for handling child abuse allegations was hopelessly
fragmented.
There was no clear, centralised set of guidelines
that was accessible to all congregants.
Spinks said the guidelines were outlined in
various sources
including the organisation’s translation
of the Bible;
a confidential elders’ handbook called ‘Shepherd
the Flock of God’;
confidential letters sent to the body of elders;
and articles in the organisation’s magazines,
like The Watchtower.
In one farcical moment, Spinks said he’d
found a document
showing abused individuals didn’t have to
confront their abusers
but admitted no one had a copy of the document
until they found an older member of the department
who’d photocopied it, reduced it and stuck
it in his book.
Stewart commented that it was like
trying to put your finger on a ball of mercury:
just when you think you have it, it pops up
somewhere else.
If senior advisors couldn’t navigate their
own guidelines
what hope did an abused child have?
The passive language of the guidelines
also became apparent.
Stewart noted there was no instruction in
the confidential elder’s handbook
to actively inform congregants of their right
to contact authorities.
Only if the elders were asked, were they to
tell congregants
it was their personal decision.
This is not the advice of a supportive organisation
but of one that wants no involvement.
Any abused individual who fails to raise the
subject themselves
will never get the reassurance that it’s
their right to go to the police.
The end result is that abusers are shielded
from the police.
Stewart highlighted the hypocrisy of this
passive position
putting it to Spinks that if he saw someone
breaking into a neighbour’s house
or received reliable information of a murder
he’d immediately report it to the police.
Spinks confirmed he would.
Beyond hypocrisy, Judge McClellan explained
to Spinks
the potential criminality of not reporting.
If elders determine that an allegation is true
it ceases to be knowledge of an allegation
and becomes knowledge or belief of a criminal offence.
In New South Wales, where Spinks was based
criminal sanctions could be imposed on people
who knew or believed a criminal offence had
been committed and didn’t report.
Stewart further noted that if contacting child
protection authorities
was an automatic first step
there’d be no need for elders to interview
the child
elders who, Stewart noted, had no training
in interviewing traumatised children.
Spinks agreed.
McClellan also noted that civil authorities
had the benefit of decades
of scientific research in the assessment and
treatment of abusers
none of which was available to the Jehovah’s
Witnesses
research that underscored the high risk of
re-offending.
But in a jarring moment of defiance
Spinks had already said the Bible would prevail
over science
and had proudly cited Jehovah’s Witnesses
in South Korea, Russia, Azerbaijan and Eritrea
who’d gone to prison for their beliefs.
He said the organisation would continue to
reprove and reinstate individuals
who show themselves ‘sufficiently repentant’.
When it was put it him that there was a clear
inducement
for people to pretend to be repentant if it
meant they avoided punishment
Spinks conceded that was possible.
Vincent Toole admitted to receiving three
or four allegations
of child sexual abuse every month.
A trained solicitor himself, Toole conceded
no formal training
was required to be an elder
even though the position entailed far-reaching
responsibility
for the welfare of many people.
Toole claimed that before someone was nominated
as an elder
the organisation would use a formal ‘Working
with Children’ clearance check
to establish a clean record.
But Stewart noted that such checking systems
depend on accurate databases of sexual offences.
If the authorities aren’t informed of offences
then the efficacy of the checking is compromised.
With the Jehovah’s Witnesses’ record of
not reporting offences
it seemed the organisation wanted to benefit
from this external database
but not contribute to it.
Toole repeatedly claimed he’d have no hesitation
reporting abuse to the police
but only if there was no other way to protect
the child.
In practice, this situation is highly unlikely
because the organisation believes it provides
effective protection
by moving children out of their homes like
they did with BCG
in the process, cutting her off from family life.
And indeed, when Toole was asked directly
whether he’d ever gone to the police he
admitted he hadn’t.
Toole initially claimed the legal department
had been instructed
to direct elders to clearly tell victims they
have an absolute right
to report their abuse to authorities.
But when asked to cite these instructions,
he couldn’t.
He scaled down to a lesser claim
that it was in the spirit of the organisation’s
literature to report
and admitted he’d received no formal instructions.
Toole played the human rights champion
repeatedly claiming the organisation’s reluctance
to contact authorities was about protecting
people’s right to decide
what was in their own best interests.
But genuine human rights champions inform
people of their rights
because without that awareness, people can’t
exercise their rights.
In contrast, Jehovah’s Witness children
have been kept unaware of their rights.
Toole protested that they didn’t live in
a cocoon.
But they do.
The Jehovah’s Witness organisation is a
separatist group
whose literature repeatedly warns against
bad associations with non-members.
Chapter 5 of the organisation’s book ‘Keep
Yourself in God’s Love’
is explicitly titled ‘How to keep separate
from the world’
and opens with John 15, verse 19: ‘You are
not part of this world.’
You don’t have to be physically isolated
to be effectively cocooned.
You simply have to be kept in trusting ignorance
warned against associating with non-members
and threatened with punishment or even abandonment
for disobedience.
When asked what improvements the Jehovah’s
Witness organisation
ould make in handling child sexual abuse
Terrence O’Brien was quite forthcoming.
He said clearer documentation
was needed regarding policy;
the right to report needed to be clearly explained;
and procedures needed to be clearly explained
to anyone alleging abuse.
One thing O’Brien wasn’t clear on was
protecting the congregation.
McClellan asked how the elders would safeguard
the congregation
if they fully believed the allegations of
abuse against someone
but couldn’t meet the organisation’s requirements
for proof
like the two-witness rule.
O’Brien said the elders would put restrictions
on that person’s association with children.
When McClellan noted that this depended
on elders observing the transgression
O’Brien added that congregants could report
it to them.
But McClellan pointed out that congregants
wouldn’t know to report it
because they weren’t told about the restrictions.
O’Brien agreed.
The lack of basic thought given to safeguarding
procedures was staggering.
O’Brien ruled out any change regarding the
two-witness rule
or giving women a role in the investigative
process.
He confirmed the bizarre scriptural reasons
for forbidding women to exercise authority
over men
citing 1 Timothy 2.
Reason one: Adam was formed before Eve.
This is a straightforward non sequitur.
The birth order of the Bible’s first two
humans has no logical connection
to the respective attributes of modern men
and women.
Reason two: Adam wasn’t deceived but Eve was.
In fact, according to the Bible, Adam and
Eve both succumbed
to exactly the same inducement
being told they wouldn’t die if they ate
from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
So this second reason is a lie — one for
which female Jehovah’s Witnesses pay.
On the subject of lies, it emerged that O’Brien
had knowingly given
the Commission false information
about a potential witness.
McClellan had previously enquired about the
possibility of hearing
from a member of the organisation’s Governing Body
one Geoffrey Jackson — who was currently
in Australia.
Under instruction from O’Brien
counsel for the Jehovah’s Witness organisation,
Mr Tokley
told the Commission that Jackson would probably
not be any assistance
because his role was confined to translating material.
But in fact as a member of the Governing Body
Jackson was part of an elite ruling council
of anointed servants
giving direction to the organisation, approving
publications
and shaping doctrine. And O’Brien knew it.
McClellan took a dim view of this misrepresentation
and Jackson was summoned.
The subterfuge that surrounded Geoffrey Jackson’s
appearance
at the Commission would continue into his
testimony
which was full of diversions, evasions, ambiguities
and falsehoods.
He would repeatedly sidestep the point of
a question
often reinventing the question.
For example, when Judge McClellan asked him
if there was any Biblical impediment to a
woman
being appointed to investigate an allegation
Jackson replied that there was no impediment
to a woman being involved with the investigation.
He persisted with this particular evasion
ad nauseam
and only gave a straight answer when eventually
Stewart remarked
that a person making tea during the investigation
is ‘involved’
the question was about who makes the decision.
Following O’Brien’s lead
Jackson made several misrepresentations
about his role in the organisation.
He presented an egalitarian fantasy
in which Governing Body members viewed themselves
merely as fellow workers with other Jehovah’s
Witnesses
and suggested that if the Governing Body
gave some direction not in harmony with divine word
it would be picked up on by Jehovah’s Witnesses
worldwide.
In reality, the Governing Body is an authority
that determines all the organisation’s policies and procedures
and it expects obedience.
Individuals can be disfellowshipped for disagreeing
with them
on the charge of causing divisions.
For example, some Jehovah’s Witnesses have called
for the reform of the doctrine forbidding
blood transfusions.
As reformists have noted, the scripture presented
in justification of this doctrine explicitly
mentions eating blood.
There is no Biblical concept of transfusions.
But for expressing this disagreement, reformists
have been disfellowshipped.
When Stewart asked him if they saw themselves
as Jehovah’s spokespeople on earth
Jackson said that would seem quite presumptuous.
But in a 2001 article in the organisation’s
Watchtower magazine
the Governing Body explicitly argued
that it wasn’t presumptuous of Jevovah’s
Witnesses
to point out that they alone had the backing
of the Biblical god.
Jackson also misrepresented the organisation’s
stance on corporal punishment.
McClellan asked straightforwardly
if his church accepted
the corporal punishment of children.
Jackson evaded the question
saying his church expected that parents have
the responsibility
to discipline and raise their children.
McClellan said that didn’t answer his question
— and repeated it.
After more evasions, Jackson finally said
the organisation didn’t accept or encourage it.
But the Watchtower magazine explicitly promotes
both verbal and physical punishment.
An article called ‘Disciplining Children
for Life’
claims a spanking can be a lifesaver to a child
and says that beating children with a rod
won’t kill them.
It suggests a rebuke can work for meeker children
whereas a whipping should discipline more
stubborn children.
A 2006 article called ‘Reliable advice for
Raising Children’
also promotes a combination of the rod and reproof
charitably noting not all children need physical
punishment.
Returning to the issue of sexual abuse
McClellan asked about the possibility
of giving women a decision-making role.
After some evasion, Jackson confirmed the
organisation’s doctrine
that only men could be judges
and claimed this was based on scripture.
But Jackson forgot the prophetess Deborah
whose story is told in chapter four of the
Bible’s book of Judges.
The book depicts six major and six minor judges.
Deborah was a major judge who made legal decisions.
It would seem there is Biblical precedent
for giving women decision-making roles.
When Stewart put it to him that many females
would feel more comfortable
speaking to a woman about their abuse
Jackson rejected the idea.
He said unlike what he called ‘your churches’
where people didn’t talk to each other
Jehovah’s Witness congregations became familiar
and friendly.
Leaving aside his ignorant comment
on the social relationships of other churches
his argument appeared to be that any abused
female members
should feel comfortable speaking to the men.
Like the elders testifying before him
he seemed unable to grasp the reality that
many don’t.
Stewart questioned Jackson about disassociation
when individuals state they no longer want
to be known as a Jehovah’s Witness.
It’s a course of action many abused individuals
feel driven to take
when their molesters go unpunished
and remain in their congregations.
The problem is if you disassociate,
you get shunned
so having been abused, you then lose their
entire social network.
Jackson rejected the idea that people who
no longer wanted
to be known as a Jehovah Witnesses had to
disassociate.
He said they could choose to simply become
‘inactive’ also known as ‘fading’.
But Stewart noted that inactive members were
still subject
to the rules and discipline of the organisation.
In a moment of staggering disingenuousness
Jackson claimed he’d have to check because
it wasn’t his field.
Stewart persisted, putting it to Jackson that
there was no middle road
you were either a member or you weren’t.
If you fade, you’re still subject to the
organisation’s discipline and rules.
Having just claimed it wasn’t his field
Jackson now confirmed this was true.
Jackson conveniently forgot another fact about
inactive witnesses.
Even though they’re still officially considered
Jehovah’s Witnesses
in practice, they’re often actively avoided
and excluded by other Witnesses
on the grounds that their lack of activity
makes them a ‘bad association’.
Sometimes there’s little practical difference
between this exclusion and formal shunning.
Like the elders who testified before him
Jackson, with his constant evasions and equivocations
exposed himself as a man of no principle
unwilling to state the true doctrines of the
organisation.
And this highlighted a particularly damning
hypocrisy.
When molesters escape justice on the grounds
that neither a second witness or a confession
was produced
the organisation offers abused individuals
the supposed consolation
that the matter will be left in Jehovah’s hands
the message being that they need to brave
the hardships of this earthly life
because divine justice will ultimately prevail.
But if Jackson had such conviction in ultimate
divine justice himself
he’d proclaim his beliefs proudly, braving
any earthly hardships
that resulted from his faith.
Instead, in order to escape earthly criticism
he takes refuge in misrepresenting his religion
while abused individuals are expected to endure
their suffering.
He is a hypocrite and a coward.
In 2017, eighteen months after the Commission’s
case 29
explored the Jehovah’s Witness organisation’s
response
to the abuse of BCB and BCG
the Commission initiated case 54
a follow-up investigation in which Rodney
Spinks and Terrence O’Brien
were called back to report what progress
if any had been made by the organisation.
The Commission requested that a Governing
Body member
be available in person or by video to give
evidence
in this important follow-up hearing.
The request was denied.
Despite the extensive time it was given
the organisation had managed to produce three
meagre documents
including a letter to all elders, and a guide
for the service desk.
Like other procedural documents produced by
the organisation
the service desk guide was inexplicably classified
as strictly confidential;
not even for the eyes of service desk secretaries.
The cases of BCB and BCG had highlighted the
damage caused
by the organisation’s lack of procedural
transparency.
But Spinks and O’Brien were unable to explain
why congregation members were still being
kept from information
about processes that governed their lives.
A third document had been drafted
just three days before the Commission hearing.
It hadn’t been published or distributed
and Stewart spotted some obvious flaws
and significant ambiguities in the text.
Spinks conceded the wording still needed work
but repeatedly claimed more rigorous practices
were now in place.
When invited to support that claim with documentation
he admitted he couldn’t.
So instead of a public centralised policy
document
the picture remained fragmented.
Judge McClellan noted that unless their intentions
were reflected clearly in their policy documents
there was a good chance they’d just fall
backwards.
Predictably, the organisation rejected the
key findings of the Commission.
It continued to demand two witnesses.
It also rejected the possibility of women
having any decision-making role.
And it stood by its practice of shunning abused
individuals
who felt driven to leave the control of their
congregations
in order to escape their abusers.
O’Brien continued to assert that it was
their own choice to be shunned.
There was a strong element of stagey performance
as he defiantly declared that in regard to
the shunning policy,
Jehovah was their judge;
Jehovah was their lawgiver;
Jehovah was their king.
The BCB and BCG hearings
revealed an organisation with its fingers
firmly in its ears.
To expect change to come from within this secretive, deceptive, controlling organisation
is, I believe, futile.
Energies are much better spent, as BCG suggested
making it financially and criminally accountable
for failing the children in its congregations
and, like the work of the Australian Royal Commission
bringing its damaging practices to public attention—
exposing abuse.